krameṇa sarge parivardhamāne
kadāpi divyā: sanakādayaste |
bhavadvilokāya vikuṇṭhalokaṃ
prapedire mārutamandireśa ||1||
krameṇa sarge	gradually,as creation
parivardhamāne	was progressing
kadāpi	once
divyā: sanakādaya: te	those divine (sages) Sanaka and others
bhavat-vilokāya	to see Thee
vikuṇṭhalokaṃ prapedire	reached Vaikunthloka
mārutamandireśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur
O Lord of Guruvaayur! as creation progressed, the divine sages Sanaka and the others wanting to pay their respects to Thee went to Vaikuntha loka.
manojñanaiśreyasakānanādyai-
ranekavāpīmaṇimandiraiśca |
anopamaṃ taṃ bhavato niketaṃ
munīśvarā: prāpuratītakakṣyā: ||2||
manojña-	the enchanting
naiśreyasa-kānana-ādyai: -	Naishreyasha Kaanana (the garden by that name) and other
aneka-vāpī	with many lakes
maṇimandirai: - ca	and gems studded mansions
anopamaṃ taṃ	that incomparable
bhavata: niketaṃ	Thy abode
munīśvarā: prāpu: -	the sages reached
atīta-kakṣyā:	having crossed the (six) ramparts
Crossing the six ramparts, the sages reached Thy unmatched abode with the Naishreyasha garden, many lakes and many mansions studded with gems.
bhavaddiddṛkṣūnbhavanaṃ vivikṣūn
dvā:sthau jayastān vijayo'pyarundhām |
teṣāṃ ca citte padamāpa kopa:
sarvaṃ bhavatpreraṇayaiva bhūman ||3||
bhavat-diddṛkṣūn-	desirous of seeing Thee
bhavanaṃ vivikṣūn	and about to enter (Thy) abode
dvā:sthau	two gatekeepers
jaya: - tān	Jaya, them (the sages)
vijaya: -api-arundhām	also Vijaya, stopped
teṣāṃ ca citte	and in their (sages') minds
padam-āpa kopa:	entered anger
sarvaṃ bhavat-preraṇayā-eva	all this by Thy prompting alone
bhūman	O Infinite One!
The sages were about to enter Thy abode to see Thee, when two gatekeepers, Jaya and Vijaya stopped them. This made the sages angry. All this happened by Thy prompting only.
vaikuṇṭhalokānucitapraceṣṭau
kaṣṭau yuvāṃ daityagatiṃ bhajetam |
iti praśaptau bhavadāśrayau tau
harismṛtirno'stviti nematustān ||4||
vaikuṇṭhaloka-anucita-praceṣṭau	for Vaikunthloka, is not fit, whose conduct
kaṣṭau yuvāṃ	wicked ones you two
daitya-gatiṃ bhajetam	state of Asuraas will attain
iti praśaptau	thus cursed
bhavat-āśrayau tau	Thy servants they
hari: -smṛti: -na: -astu-	may we remember Hari (God)
iti nematu:-tān	thus beseeching prostrated before them
The two gatekeepers were cursed by the sages that as their conduct was not befitting for them to be in Vaikunthloka, they may be embodied as Asuraas. Jaya and Vijaya, Thy servants, beseeched the sages that their devotion to Thee may not falter. So saying, they prostrated to the sages.
tadetadājñāya bhavānavāpta:
sahaiva lakṣmyā bahirambujākṣa |
khageśvarāṃsārpitacārubāhu-
rānandayaṃstānabhirāmamūrtyā ||5||
tat-etat-ājñāya	that this knowing
bhavān-avāpta:	Thou coming (out)
saha-eva lakṣmyā	along with Laxmi
bahi: -ambujākṣa	out, O Lotus eyed Lord!
khageśvara-aṃsa-	on Garuda's shoulder
arpita-cāru-bāhu: -	placing Thy charming arm
ānandayan-tān-	delighting them (the sages)
abhirāma-mūrtyā	by Thy beautiful form
O Lotus-eyed Lord! Knowing all what had happened, Thou came out along with Laxmi, with Thy charming arm resting on Garuda. The sages were delighted to see Thy beautiful form.
prasādya gīrbhi: stuvato munīndrā-
nananyanāthāvatha pārṣadau tau |
saṃrambhayogena bhavaistribhirmā-
mupetamityāttakṛpaṃ nyagādī: ||6||
prasādya gīrbhi:	with pleasing words
stuvata: munīndrān-	to the sages as they were praising Thee,
ananya-nāthau-	who did not have any other refuge (other than Thee)
atha pārṣadau tau	to those two attendants
saṃrambhayogena bhavai:-tribhi:-	by the path of confrontation, in three lives
mām-upetam-	attain me
iti-ātta-kṛpam	thus overcome by compassion
nyagādī:	Thou said
As the sages were praising Thee with pleasing words, Thou told the two attendants, who had no refuge but Thee, to confront three lives as Asuras on earth. Overcome by compassion, then Thou granted them Thy attainment.
tvadīyabhṛtyāvatha kāśyapāttau
surārivīrāvuditau ditau dvau |
sandhyāsamutpādanakaṣṭaceṣṭau
yamau ca lokasya yamāvivānyau ||7||
tvadīya-bhṛtyau-	Thy two attendants
atha kāśyapāt-tau	then from sage Kashyapa, they both
surāri-vīrau-	as the gods' powerful enemies
uditau ditau dvau	were born of Diti the two
sandhyā-samutpādana-	being begotten at evening
kaṣṭa-ceṣṭau	having cruel nature
yamau ca	and the twins (became)
lokasya yamau-iva-anyau	for the worlds, like other two Yamas (the death god)
Thereafter,Thy two attendants took birth as great Asuras through Diti and her husband sage Kashyapa. They being begotten in the evening twilight, the twins became cruel in nature as if they were the gods of death for the world.
hiraṇyapūrva: kaśipu: kilaika:
paro hiraṇyākṣa iti pratīta: |
ubhau bhavannāthamaśeṣalokaṃ
ruṣā nyarundhāṃ nijavāsanāndhau ||8||
hiraṇya-pūrva: kaśipu: kila-eka:	(the name) Hiranya preceding Kashipu, i.e. Hiranyakashipu was one
para: hiraṇyākṣa iti pratīta:	the other Hiranyaaksha thus was known
ubhau	both
bhavat-nātham-aśeṣa-lokaṃ	the whole world which has Thee as the master
ruṣā	in anger
nyarundhāṃ	(they) tormented
nija-vāsanā-andhau	by their own vaasanaas being blinded
One son was known by the name of Hiranyakashipu and the other was known as Hiranyaaksha.They tormented the whole world, which has Thee as the master, in anger and blinded by their inherent evil tendencies.
tayorhiraṇyākṣamahāsurendro
raṇāya dhāvannanavāptavairī |
bhavatpriyāṃ kṣmāṃ salile nimajya
cacāra garvādvinadan gadāvān ||9||
tayo: -	of them
hiraṇyākṣa-mahāsurendra:	Hiranyaaksha the great Asura
raṇāya dhāvan-	a fight seeking
anavāpta-vairī	not getting any opponent
bhavat-priyāṃ kṣmāṃ	Thy dear earth
salile nimajya	immersing in water
cacāra garvāt-vinadan	roamed about, roaring in arrogance
gadāvān	carrying a mace
Of the two of them, Hiranyaaksha, the great Asura, seeking a fight and not getting an opponent, immersed Thy dear earth into the water. He then roamed about roaring arrogantly, carrying a mace.
tato jaleśāt sadṛśaṃ bhavantaṃ
niśamya babhrāma gaveṣayaṃstvām |
bhaktaikadṛśya: sa kṛpānidhe tvaṃ
nirundhi rogān marudālayeśa ||10|
tata:	then
jaleśāt	from the Lord of Waters (Varuna)
sadṛśaṃ bhavantaṃ	as his equal Thee (are)
niśamya	hearing (thus)
babhrāma	(he) roamed about
gaveṣayan tvām	searching for Thee
bhaktaika-dṛśya:	(O Thou) who can be seen only by Thy devotees
sa kṛpānidhe tvaṃ	That Abode of Compassion,Thou
nirundhi rogān	eradicate my ailments
marudālayeśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
Then coming to know from the god of the waters, Varuna, that Thou are the only match for him, Hiranyaaksha roamed about searching for Thee. O Thou, who can be attained only by Thy devotees, Thou the abode of Compassion, kindly eradicate my ailments, O Lord of Guruvaayur!.